CRAIG
Why
don't you go ahead and start by introducing
yourself, then we'll get into some questions?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. So briefly,
I'm Raphael Townshend, founder and CEO at Atomic
AI. My background is really coming more from the
AI space. Originally, I did my undergraduate at
UC Berkeley in electrical engineering and computer
science. I started my PhD working in
computer vision but fairly quickly, actually,
transitioned- this was at Stanford, into working
on structural biology applications specifically.
So taking a lot of the tools that had made such
a difference in computer vision with things like
self-driving cars or in natural language
processing, with things like ChatGPT, seeing
if we could apply them now to the field of biology
and especially the structural biology space that I
was talking about. It's really about understanding
the shapes of molecules, kind of understanding the
shapes so you can better understand what they do.
So I started working in that space. A seven-year
PhD later- of banging my head against those kinds
of problems, I really started getting some good
success; including, I guess, what would be the
founding work of Atomic, which was basically this
highly accurate predictor of the three-dimensional
structure of RNA molecules known as AlphaFold for
RNA, which was a big breakthrough in the space
recently. So that work ended up featuring in the
cover of Science in late 2021. From there, I
really started Atomic to continue leveraging and
developing those kinds of technologies to really
enable this next generation of RNA drug discovery.
CRAIG
And when you say,
AlphaFold for RNA, were you following
DeepMinds research and applying it
to RNA? Or is it just analogous to what
DeepMind was doing with protein folding?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. So I actually
worked on the DeepMind team a few years back
so I'm well familiar with their work as well.
While there are certainly similarities, there's
also a need to redesign a lot of the algorithms,
the AI models from the ground up. So RNA, while
at a high level is a similar molecule to proteins,
there's a lot of intricacies that require
custom AI models built. For example,
RNA is a much more flexible molecule
than proteins. So really understanding
those dynamics of it is a key piece that you
need to build into these kinds of algorithms.
CRAIG
Yeah. So
the algorithms that you worked on that became
Atomic AI, came out of your work at Stanford,
is that what you said? Or came out
of your work at Google DeepMind?
RAPHAEL
This is out of my work at Stanford,
actually. Before even working at DeepMind I had
already developed the core of these algorithms
that worked quite well on RNA specifically. It
was very cool to be making those breakthroughs and
seeing the AlphaFold, for proteins, breakthroughs
happening very shortly thereafter. It was a very
interesting time overall, is perhaps one fun
way to put it. The cool sign on the AI side for
RNA is that the amount of RNA data that was
publicly available is much smaller than the
amount available for proteins. So you needed to
design some very, sort of bespoke algorithms to
work on the limited data. The original science
paper, for example, was trained on just 18 RNAs
total. So a very small number, right? But you
could see you could do surprisingly well given
that small number. The problem was definitely not
solved. I don't want to claim that it was solved
at that time. That plugged into a lot to what
we're doing at Atomic these days, which is really
building upon that advance. But, it really showed
the power of these custom kinds of algorithms.
CRAIG
Yeah.
For people that don't follow biotech, because
a lot of the listeners are AI people; can you
explain very briefly what RNA is, why it's
important in drug discovery- everyone knows
that the COVID vaccine was an RNA vaccine
but they don't necessarily understand what
that means, and why understanding the shapes of
molecules would be important for RNA therapies?
RAPHAEL
Two great questions,
Craig. I would say first of all, RNA, maybe if
you remember the most basic biology lessons, the
central dogma in some ways; we have DNA encodes
the information, which then goes to RNA, which
then goes to proteins. For a long time, people
thought of proteins as the workhorses of the cell,
the things that did everything and RNA is just a
messenger that codes for the right proteins. Now,
it turns out that view is not quite right. In
fact, there's this vast world of RNA that's
kind of doing its own set of functions beyond just
coding for proteins. In fact, there's this really
nice hypothesis, the RNA world hypothesis, about
how all of life was first RNA-based, then DNA and
proteins came afterward. An interesting other stat
that's kind of fun to think about is, if you look
at the human genome, about 1% to 2% of it codes
for protein. So about 1% to 2% of the human genome
becomes proteins but about 80% of the genome
becomes RNA at one point or another. So there's
about this huge world of RNA that never even
becomes proteins that we're just barely scratching
the surface of. So with all that context in mind,
we've got proteins- seen as the workhorse of the
cell. If you look at most drugs on the market
today, they're all going after proteins. It's been
seen as the main target. That's been great in many
dimensions but there's been a number of diseases
that have been essentially undruggable at the
protein level. We've been trying to drug it for
40 years and we just can't go after some of these
proteins. And these are really high-value things.
There's this one protein called c-MYC that's
involved in 75% of human cancers that we've just
failed to get any drugs to. So the idea is, now
you've got your DNA, goes to RNA, goes to protein;
you go one step earlier in the process and you
go after the RNA that codes for that protein,
for the c-MYC protein. In this way, you're sort
of going after these diseases that were previously
undruggable by increasing the attack surface and
giving yourself new ways of striking at them. So
that kind of tells you a little bit about the
RNA and why you care about RNA drug discovery,
specifically. There's a lot more complexity,
I'm simplifying at some level but that's one
of the key messages there. The other piece of
why you care about the shapes of the molecules,
and it's very linked RNA in some ways, but it
also has this much broader kind of potential to;
it's fundamentally about the fact that the
shape of a molecule kind of determines what
it does. Structure determines function, is what
people say. And it's almost too obvious in some
ways. The shape of a bike is important to what it
does. If the wheels of the bike were in the wrong
place it wouldn't do a very good job moving you
around. Very similarly, the shape of a molecule
is really key to what it does. So you need to make
sure it's all in the right place to perform its
function adequately. So sometimes when there's
a disease you can understand almost by looking
at the structure, looking at the physics driving
these things and understand from first principles,
what's going wrong. Then you can intelligently
design medicines to solve those issues. This is
a process known as rational design, which stands
in contrast to the traditional way of doing it;
which is more throwing things at a wall and
seeing what sticks, which is more known as
phenotypic screening- would be the technical term
there. And it's kind of seen as one of the future
directions of drug discovery and it's playing
an especially critical role in the RNA space
because there's a lot of things that we need
to really understand from first principles to
design well. So I'll stop there for a
second but hopefully that makes sense,
both on the RNA- why that matters to a huge degree
and why the shapes of molecules matter as well.
CRAIG
Yeah. Given that context, can you just describe,
quickly, what the RNA vaccine for COVID was doing
and how understanding the shape of the
RNA molecule played into that therapy?
RAPHAEL
Of course. The mRNA vaccines was one
of the first big breakthroughs in this RNA drug
discovery landscape, I think everyone got to see
that firsthand. Fundamentally, what the RNA side
of things is doing is it's coding for specific
protein that is part of the Coronavirus, the spike
protein. So if you remember, you've seen all these
graphics, you've got the virus particle and you've
got the spike protein sticking out of it. The RNA
is basically coding for that spike protein but
not the rest of the virus. So then that gets into
your cells, your cells produce a lot of the spike
protein, and then your immune system essentially
learns to recognize that and says, [Oh, that's
a foreign thing that we've seen], and can train
itself right off the bat to find anything that
presents that spike protein in the future. So
then when the real virus shows up, it's already
trained, your immune system is already trained to
knock that down. Now, the part where a lot of the
structural piece comes in is actually for making
the next generation of those mRNA vaccines. In
particular, one big issue that's been presented
with the RNA vaccines is the need for cold chain
storage. The Maderna or Pfizer vaccines need to be
stored at very low temperatures to be transported
around the world. For example, getting that to
low-income countries is a challenging proposition.
So what you'd like to do is you'd like to make
those vaccines more stable, the RNA molecules
more stable. In that case, what you're doing
is you're trying to find the shapes that are well
folded, that are more resistant to falling apart,
basically more stable overall. So in that way,
you're rationally designing the next generation
to be a better version of the first gen. So
there's this nice interplay where there's all
sorts of different properties of these RNAs that
you can optimize through that kind of approach.
CRAIG
Yeah. Since I have you explaining
this stuff, you introduce an RNA molecule and
it then goes to the DNA? Explain the mechanism.
RAPHAEL
Of course. Biology is fascinating at some level
and there's a whole bunch of hidden complexity in
there. Fundamentally in this case, actually, the
RNA is not becoming DNA at some point, it's just
staying as RNA. And then your cells machinery,
there's these other molecules known as ribosomes
that can translate that RNA into proteins for you.
It’s kind of cool; the ribosomes themselves are
actually mostly RNA molecules. You can kind of
see how it bootstraps itself. You have these RNA
molecules that are responsible for turning RNA
molecules into proteins. That's kind of one of
the reasons people think that RNA might be the
first source of life. So anyways, you've got
these RNA molecules and then these ribosomes
come and translate them into proteins, into the
spike proteins. Eventually, the RNA molecules
get degraded and thrown out of your cells but
before that point its produced enough of the
spike proteins for your immune system to recognize
them. And sometimes you need a couple of doses.
That's why there was a couple doses of some of the
COVID vaccines; is because not enough of the of
the spike protein gets produced the first time so
you need a second dose to produce some more of it.
CRAIG
Okay. So
with Atomic AI, you're designing RNA molecules or
you're understanding the shape of existing
RNA molecules? Yeah, talk me through that.
RAPHAEL
Yeah. Another great question, frankly, because
there's kind of these two broad categories of RNA
technologies- is how I think about them. They're
the mRNA vaccine kind of category where it's on a
base, the medicine itself is the RNA. For example,
you're injecting some RNA to your body and it's
producing it. But then there's the other category,
which is RNA targeted, where you're targeting
the RNA that's already in your body. Then
finding the medicine needs to hit that because
your body, as I said before, 80% of the human
genome becomes RNA at some point or another. So
there's a lot of that sitting around. So while you
can actually apply this fundamental technology to
both of these, the RNA-based medicines as well as
the RNA targeted ones– and what I was describing
about making the vaccines more stable is applying
it to the RNA base piece, we can also apply
our technology to the RNA-targeted piece
to understand the shapes of the RNA molecules
already in your body to then go and target those
selectively. That's actually the initial focus of
Atomic AI; is understanding the shapes with the
RNAs already in your body, folding all of those,
predicting the shapes of all of those molecules,
and then targeting those. But maybe this hopefully
paints the picture of how this technology can be
very broadly applicable, because even here you
can see how you could apply it to these two fairly
different RNA technologies but in both cases,
it can make a huge difference in drug discovery.
CRAIG
Yeah.
And on the COVID vaccine, the vaccine is
introducing RNA molecules into the body.
RAPHAEL
Exactly.
CRAIG
In the targeting RNA that
exists already in the body, you're targeting
it to turn certain RNA molecules on and off,
or to modify the behavior? What
are you doing with the targeting?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. There's a huge
range of things you could do there. The thing that
we're fundamentally focused on is, as you say,
turning it on or off. The easiest thing you could
do in some ways is- a protein that you want to go
after, you want to decrease the amount of that
protein, so you go and hit the RNA instead. And
you're like, [Let's go and destroy that RNA], and
then there'll be less than the protein and then
you'll have gone after this undruggable disease
that you couldn't hit at the protein level.
CRAIG
And why wouldn't you be able to hit at the protein
level? I mean, is it understanding the shape of
the protein or finding molecules? As I understand
it, the importance of understanding the shape
of a protein is, if you want to find a molecule
that will fit into a pocket in the protein, for
example- to prevent the protein from binding
to other things. Is it that sort of thing that–
you're looking for a molecule that will fit into
the RNA molecule and stop it from functioning?
What exactly are you doing at the shape level?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. I think you're exactly right; shape is the
key in both the protein and the RNA level. The big
reason some of these proteins are undruggable is
because they're disordered. They're not actually
adopting any single shape, they're just completely
floppy. So they don't present any pockets for
you to hit in the first place. Like this c-MYC
protein that I was talking about, that’s involved
in 75% of human cancers, it's just disordered.
There's no pockets for you to go after. So the
idea is, instead, you go after the RNA and you
try and hit the shapes at that level instead and
design things. It turns out that understanding
the shapes at the RNA level is really critical
as well, to get molecules that are selective,
basically hitting just that RNA and not a bunch
of other things, and functional- that do the thing
that you need it to do. In this case, degrade the
RNA or prevent it from making more of a protein.
CRAIG
Yeah.
And how many RNA molecules exist in the body
and how do you know which ones to go after?
RAPHAEL
There's far more RNA molecules than there are
proteins. If you're saying the number of distinct
kinds of RNA molecules, you'll remember that stat
I was talking about, how there's like 80% of the
human genome becomes RNA but only like 2% becomes
proteins. So there's just this vast number of RNAs
and some of them don't even code for proteins,
they just do other things in your body. We're just
trying to understand, still, a lot of the biology
behind those. If you just think about the ones
that code for proteins for a second, the mRNAs,
the messenger RNAs- that's what that stands for-
the ones that code for the proteins, then there's
hundreds of 1000s of those, of distinct kinds of
mRNAs there. So that's just one small piece of
the RNA world but it already presents this huge
possibility of potential targets to go after.
CRAIG
Yeah.
And in the case of the COVID vaccine,
they identified the mRNA that created the—
RAPHAEL
The spike protein,
exactly. You're exactly right. But then there's
other kinds of RNA. There's non-coding RNA;
RNA that doesn't code for proteins are known as
ncRNA. Or there's rRNA, which is ribosomal RNA.
There's all these different categories,
and kind of fun- people just stick little
letters in front of RNA or after the word
RNA to indicate these different categories.
CRAIG
Right. Is Atomic AI's mission
to define the shape— as has been the case with
AlphaFold- they just came out with AlphaFold 3,
RAPHAEL
Yeah, very exciting,
CRAIG
to define the
shape of all of the existing mRNA molecules?
Or, are you selecting certain mRNA molecules
that you know are related to certain diseases
and just focusing on understanding their shape?
RAPHAEL
I mean, the long-term dream
is really about building a map of every RNA that
exists as well as enabling the design of new RNAs
that we've never seen before. You've sort of seen
what AlphaFold can do in the protein landscape;
people are using it for all sorts of things.
The idea is to bring that revolution to the
RNA space as well. One simple way I think
about Atomic, it's like, we're trying to
combine that big RNA breakthrough with the
COVID vaccines. And there's been a number of
other RNA technologies that have come to fruition
in the last few years, with the AI breakthroughs,
like the AlphaFolds of the world. So there's that
dream in the long term. Our immediate focus is
on going after very specific RNAs and showing the
potential on a few test cases first. Showing like,
[Hey, you can do this here to get to this
point and design these new drugs that are
very exciting.] That then paints the map of
what you can do in a much broader landscape.
CRAIG
Yeah. And we'll
talk about the AI behind it in a minute but
what are the targets that you're focused on
right now? I mean, you mentioned this c-MYC
protein. Is that one that you're working on?
RAPHAEL
So we haven't disclosed
our targets, are specific ones at this point, but
I would say they very much fall in that category.
There's a number of these undruggable protein
targets that you're trying to hit at the RNA
level instead. And a number of these targets
are in the cancer space- is a big area that
we're looking at. I can continue using c-MYC
as an example actually but it's a stand-in for
many other possible proteins you could use.
That's essentially known as a transcription
factor. It regulates how much of every other
protein is made. So you get too much c-MYC,
you get too much of every other protein, you
get uncontrolled replication of your cells,
you get cancer; so you really want to decrease
the amount of it. There's many proteins like
this so you really just want to decrease the
amount of it to control cancer spread. So that's
one big area of focus. The second big area is
neuroscience, diseases like neurodegenerative
diseases basically. So think about things
like Alzheimer's or Parkinson's in that case.
CRAIG
Right. Where,
again, you're attacking the RNA that builds
the proteins that are causing the disease.
RAPHAEL
Exactly
CRAIG
At the therapeutic level, if you understand
the shape of those RNA molecules and you
create a molecule that interrupts that
mRNA molecule, do you then just inject
the therapeutic into the bloodstream and
it finds the mRNA? How does that work?
RAPHAEL
It's a great question.
So the technology– what you could use to target
the RNA, there's a whole bunch of different ways
you could do that, different modalities, is what
people call those. The one that we're focused on
today is small molecules. Small molecule is like
20 atoms, whatever; they're small basically. And
it's very easy for them to get around and
in your body is really the key thing there;
delivery is easy. It's really classic, any drugs
on the market or small-molecule drugs, most of
them target proteins but we're doing RNA-targeted
small molecules basically. The nice thing about
these is you can oftentimes just take them orally,
you can just take them as a pill. That makes it
really easy and then you can get across your
body in different ways. So you've seen a lot
of these new technologies like the mRNA vaccines
or others where you need an injection or sometimes
you even need a surgery or something like that
to get them. The beauty of this kind of approach
is that you can then bring that back to just
being a pill that you can take again and you're
going after these diseases that you don't really
have other nice ways of hitting them otherwise.
CRAIG
Yeah. We spoke about
Insilico and I've interviewed Alex Z.; I won't
try and remember how to pronounce his last name,
on the program but they're looking at the
universe of molecules, small molecules,
and trying to narrow the search space based,
as I understand it, on the properties of those
molecules before putting them into trials. So
you raise your potential success rate at the
trial level? Are you talking to them at all? It
seems like this would be a more precise way of
narrowing the search space if you understood the
shapes of the molecules. Or, are they doing that?
RAPHAEL
Yeah, I mean,
I haven't talked to Alex recently or anything. I
mean, there's this huge space of exciting groups
pushing these kinds of approaches, I would say.
I think they are very much using AlphaFold-like
approaches as well. I believe I've seen that
work but at the protein level primarily because
AlphaFold for proteins already exists and has
been handed out to the world, and everyone
can use that for what they have. I think that
there's this recognition across the field that,
[Oh, understanding the shapes of these molecules
is really powerful and can let us do a lot of
things.] From our standpoint, we're trying to
make the same thing happen in the RNA space,
again. I can say, I don't know about Insilico
medicine specifically, but I can tell you
firsthand, there's a lot of groups that are
quite interested in understanding the shapes
of RNA molecules to make this dream of rational
design happen there as well. I definitely think
there's a recognition across the field that these
AlphaFold type approaches, these rational design
type of approaches are really the next wave, the
next generation of these kinds of approaches.
CRAIG
Yeah. So now, the AI behind Atomic,
I interviewed Oriol Vinyals on the program about
AlphaFold. It was maybe a year or two ago. To my
understanding, it was an extension of their
work in AlphaZero, where it's a combination
of search and reinforcement learning to come
up with, sort of, candidates. Then they had a
second system that ranked the candidates and then
would narrow that further for testing. Is that
essentially what you're doing with RNA? Why don't
you walk us through the system that you've built?
RAPHAEL
Of course. So some of the initial
systems were very much along those lines, like
three or four years ago, I would say, you create
a bunch of candidates and then you rank them
using the scoring functions. I think since then
we've actually dramatically overhauled a lot we've
built, and to be fair, a lot of the field has been
moving in this direction more generally. And we've
been building these big transformer-based models,
first of all, these things that have made such a
big difference in the power of technologies like
ChatGPT. Then we've used those to directly
generate the structures of these molecules
through these generative AI approaches, might
be one way to think about that. So in this case,
you can just take an RNA sequence and it directly
can produce a three-dimensional structure or even
a set of 3D structures if you think that it's
dynamic and might adopt different shapes over
time. So that piece has been very interesting.
Part of what we've needed to do to enable that is,
these transformer base models are very
data-hungry. You couldn't really do the
18 data point thing we did before, where you only
trained on 18 RNA structures to build this kind of
thing. But, we recognize that it was critical
that we move to those kinds of architectures
for the long run to really crack a lot of
this problem. The other piece of Atomic,
I've been talking a lot about the algorithms, is
we also have our own in-house wet labs that we
use to generate our own data at a very large scale
to train these AI RNA models. In some ways we have
these top-tier AI folks working but then we're
also building the right data that's purpose-built
for these kinds of models. And this is really
a broader trend that I'm quite excited about,
which is this integrated lab, sort of computation
approach, where you have this iterative cycle
where you're generating data that then makes
the AI better that can then feed into more data,
that's more targeted to further improve the AI
to get that, like, virtuous cycle of improvement.
CRAIG
So can we
take the example of an undruggable protein-
and you understand the mRNA that generates,
I guess- is that the right word?
that protein, or builds that protein,
or has the instruction set to create the protein
and you want to interrupt that mRNA molecule. The
first step then is to understand the shape of the
RNA molecule. So at that point, what do you do?
RAPHAEL
It's actually quite interesting
because in theory, you don't need to know the
shape to start trying to go after it. You could
just take your RNA and start throwing molecules at
it and see what happens. In fact, that's what the
first generation of companies in this space did
about a decade ago, at this point. The issue there
is that the molecules were generally not potent,
first of all. They didn't do what they needed
to do. It would stick to the RNA but it wouldn't
destroy it or decrease the amount of protein etc.
On top of that, they're oftentimes not selective.
So they bond to that RNA but they also bond to
many other RNAs at the same time. So there's
issues of potency and selectivity. That's really
where the shape starts coming into play. Because
you want to find the unique 3D shapes, the unique
pocket where you could get a molecule to stick
there and then it will. You could optimize it
to bind to that location, not others. On top of
that, if there's a well-defined shape somewhere;
nature doesn't waste effort generally. So those
things are generally the pieces that are actually
functional and doing something interesting,
versus some generic piece of RNA might not
actually be doing any interesting function.
So shape then becomes critical to get over
these barriers of function and cell activity.
To give you an example of what this does then,
is you could find a shape in the RNA molecule
that's responsible for keeping it stable,
I mentioned stability before, and you can
destabilize that structure with a small
molecule. It's kind of like it binds in there
and it makes it less structured, basically.
Then that lets enzymes, other proteins that are
responsible for chopping up this RNA molecule,
have an easier time to doing so. So you're
destabilizing it, you're more prone to getting
chopped up, and that decreases the amount of it,
decreasing the amount of protein- cures cancer.
CRAIG
But how do you discover the shape? I mean,
that's essentially what you're doing, right?
RAPHAEL
Exactly. This actually gets at the reason why
folks are so excited about things like alphaFold
in general; because the traditional way that you
find these shapes is through these very expensive,
very slow experimental techniques. They have names
like X-ray crystallography, or cryo-electron
microscopy, etc. And we could get into the
technical details of how they work but really,
the key to remember is that these things can
take months or years to solve a single structure.
I have a good friend of mine, he spent his entire
PhD solving a single protein structure using these
techniques. And these machines, the cheap machines
in some ways, cost millions of dollars. So if
you can take this process that takes months or
years to get a single shape and then use these AI
approaches to bring it down to minutes or seconds
instead, that's a big deal. People really care
about that, basically. So what we're doing is
we can, instead of relying on these expensive
techniques and trying to run those over time,
which over the past couple of decades have solved
maybe a thousand RNA structures total, depending
on how you count. That's actually generous, maybe
it's a couple hundred; you can instead take these
AI approaches and just map out everything at once
and find these interesting structures, you're
finding the pieces that are folding into nice
pockets that are targetable in the first place.
So one way that I talked about what we're doing is
we're essentially taking the space of all the RNAs
in your body and identifying which parts of it are
the most structured and targetable through drugs.
CRAIG
Okay,
how do you do that? Is there a
library of mRNA shapes already?
RAPHAEL
You asked me
how you train those kinds of models in the first
place; there's one thing. So there's an existing
library of shapes that have been solved through
these expensive experimental techniques, as I
was talking about before. Maybe you have a couple
hundred of those. So that's the starting point,
that's your gold standard. Now, as I was just
saying, these AI approaches are very data-hungry
in general. And you can get some initial bang for
your buck through being clever on the algorithm
design; that was the initial science paper. But,
eventually you run into the bitter lesson of,
you just need more data and more compute
to really get over some of these things.
So this is actually where RNA itself ends up
being quite an interesting molecule because
you can design experiments that are very high
throughput, that give you lots of measurements,
even parallel for RNA specifically. That's
because you can connect it to DNA sequencing
and the cost of DNA sequencing has fallen off
a cliff over the last couple of decades. So we
can design these experiments that can measure
tens of millions of RNAs in a single shot. So
let me explain how one of these techniques works
just to paint the picture for a second. So you
have your RNA molecule and you expose it to a
chemical and that chemical will go and nip the
RNA at different points, it'll kind of damage it,
basically. Then you can convert that pretty easily
back to DNA. Then you can run it through your
DNA sequencer and the parts that got damaged,
basically, will show up as mutations in the DNA
sequencer. It'll be errors in the DNA sequencer.
So now you can very easily pick up where these
chemicals damaged the RNA molecule. The key is
that the places where it gets damaged are
very linked to the shape of that molecule.
One very simple way of thinking about it is that
the outer parts of the RNA are going to get more
damaged than the inner parts. So now you've got
these measurements that are telling you something
about the structure of these RNA molecules. And
because it's DNA sequencing link, you could just
run this in parallel on a huge number. On top of
that, it's actually really easy to make at least
shorter RNA molecules at a very large scale.
This process known as oligo synthesis, lets
you just do it synthetically and create, like,
millions of them at once. Versus for proteins, you
can’t actually sequence those. You can't run those
through DNA sequences very easily. On top of that,
making them is harder, you kind of have to have
the cells produce the proteins for you. So in some
ways, the fact that we're operating at the RNA
level makes this job easier because you can make
and measure the RNA molecules at a much higher
throughput than you ever could for proteins.
CRAIG
And can you then model the RNA
shape in a visualization the
way that you can with AlphaFold?
RAPHAEL
Exactly. So you end up with a shape
of an RNA molecule. I can even show you sound or
something like that. How I would think about it
is- an RNA is just made of atoms at the end of the
day, like a protein or anything else and it's just
the atoms in 3D space. It's like, okay, you've
got a carbon over here, you've got a nitrogen over
here and they're bonded together, right? So you
can look at those and you can sort of see how it's
structured. You can even start simulating them,
you could just run the laws of physics on that.
That's another process that's super interesting
and can tell you how it flops around over time.
CRAIG
And then
to create the small molecule to bind
to the RNA, once you understand the
shape of the RNA molecule, do you search
through some search space for an existing
molecule that has a corresponding shape? Or,
do you then synthesize a unique molecule?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. I mean, there's a
number of different ways you could do it. One of
the common ways is really this process known as
docking basically, where you've got the shape and
you're just trying different molecules and saying,
[Do they fit? Does it interact physically
well with the other molecule?] So you could
search for these very large spaces of possible
molecules, including things that have never
been synthesized before and then say, [This
one looks good. Let's go and make this one],
then actually test it in the lab. The idea is,
you're kind of searching through this massive
space and then narrowing it down. That's one
common way. There's a few different ways you
could use these things but fundamentally,
you've got the shape, you understand what
you're trying to go after, and then you're trying
to find molecules that interact with that shape.
CRAIG
Which do you do, which does Atomic do?
RAPHAEL
So we do a lot of this docking type of approach,
as I mentioned, fitting the molecules in there.
Then we combine that with more traditional kind
of screening methods as well, which once you've
identified where the shape is, you could just
isolate that shape and then you can throw a bunch
of molecules in a lab setting at it as well. So
generally, we apply both of those techniques
together, the joint computational experimental
piece. You can even combine those together
because if you've run it in the lab, you can
then feed that back into your AI and do a better
job of docking, for example, the next time around.
CRAIG
Yeah. You were talking about transformer
models. So this isn't search and reinforcement
learning, you're generating molecule shapes.
RAPHAEL
Exactly
CRAIG
And then
if you find one that computationally seems
to fit, then you synthesize it and test it?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. You get to some RNAs,
you generate their shapes, you screen
small molecules against it computationally;
if something looks promising, you go and
synthesize that, you test that first in
cells and then in animals and you keep
pushing towards the clinic on that front.
CRAIG
Yeah.
Then eventually into human trials, I presume?
RAPHAEL
Exactly
CRAIG
Where are
you in that whole process? Where is Atomic today?
RAPHAEL
It's actually an exciting time
for Atomic because we're just starting to test
in animals for the first time here. I would say,
it's still what I call the preclinical place.
We're definitely early stage in many ways
but this is really the first time that
we're going beyond cells. We've seen
our technology work well within cells and
now we're trying to get the next layer up,
the next higher-level organism in some ways,
and really putting a lot of the platform to
the test. And we're anticipating getting a lot of
that initial data in the not-too-distant future.
Personally, it's a cool moment because I've
been working in the space for ten-plus years
at this point, and it's like, okay, the dream
is starting to become a reality in some ways.
CRAIG
Yeah. I haven't looked
at AlphaFold 3 yet. I just saw the announcements.
What's different with AlphaFold 3? And, are you
adopting whatever changes they made in AlphaFold–
I've forgotten, did you call it AlphaFold RNA, or?
RAPHAEL
Our core model is known as
ATOM-1. It's an RNA foundation model is what we
call that. I should plug the name a little bit,
I suppose. I think we're pretty excited about
AlphaFold 3 overall. I think this space as a
whole has been moving really quickly. There's
always these new advances coming from different
groups. And you always make sure you read through
the papers and understand and integrate the pieces
that are useful from these different advances. I
think the key that's happened with Alpha 3 is that
they've expanded their modeling from just proteins
to much broader states of molecules. That includes
RNA as well, to be clear. And they've seen some
pretty good success in at least some of these new
molecules in doing this kind of modeling. For
example, they've seen pretty good success at
modeling protein-small molecule interactions,
a little bit more like what Insilico Medicine
might do, of modeling protein-small molecule
interactions. They've done a pretty good job
at DNA or things like that. However, RNA is one
of the areas that still has room for improvement,
at least based on their studies, because they
still don't have state-of-the-art as compared
to more traditional methods there. Fundamentally,
that comes down to the fact that there isn't that
much RNA data out there that's public. This is
one of the key bets of Atomic. You can do very
well in certain areas where there's a lot of data
but in others, you really need to invest carefully
in collecting the right kind of data as well. So
I think there's a lot of very useful components
that have come out of the AlphaFold 3 kinds of
approaches and it's a fun paper to read overall.
I know a lot of the team members they're quite
well and I'm pretty excited for them. It's really
taking those pieces, combining it with the data
that we have already that we spent the last three
years collecting in-house to really try and create
these continued breakthroughs in the RNA space.
CRAIG
Yeah. How many RNA molecules
have you modeled successfully, to the point that
you can synthesize molecules that will fit or bind
with them whether or not there's therapeutic
interaction? How many have you done so far?
RAPHAEL
Yeah, it's a super interesting question.
I would say, there's different levels of
validation you can do. You can make the molecules
and then you could test them in certain ways. One
answer to that is tens of millions or hundreds of
millions for the highest level validation where
we made these things, and we've tested them,
found their structures, etc. But then, the
number of things that we're testing in animals,
which is several steps later down the process,
we're just getting our first one there. So you
can think of it as a funnel that’s starting from
this huge number and where each step validation is
getting smaller and smaller. But, it's the tip of
the spear there. One stat that I like to give is,
there's a level of accuracy you need to do this
kind of rational design approach. It's like, you
want your structure to be this close to correct
for you to be able to model the interactions with
a small molecule that could bind there. If your
pocket is completely wrong, it's not going to
really help. What we've seen over the last couple
of years is that on average, the structures that
we're making are sufficiently accurate now to be
able to do that rational design kind of approach.
I'm not saying that they all can do it but the
original science paper that we put out, maybe
it was like 5% or 10%. Don't quote me on that, I
don't remember the exact number but it was a small
number basically, a relatively small amount there.
But since then, over 50% of those structures are
now sufficiently accurate to do this kind
of approach on, which personally is the Holy
Grail in some ways, as far as I'm concerned. It’s
like, [Wow, we can actually use this reliably.]
CRAIG
Yeah. And once you get the process down,
is it a matter of just running this iterative
loop until you reach a level of accuracy?
RAPHAEL
Exactly.
You need the right level of accuracy. And
I don't want to overly simplify either,
you can definitely turn the crank and eventually,
you'll get there. The one thing that's interesting
and difficult in biotech is that biology is
complicated and there's 1,000,001 things that
could go wrong in various ways. You get a molecule
that's very potent and selective, for example,
but if it doesn't circulate well through your
body, then it's not going to do much anyway.
So there's a lot of pieces that you need to
put together. We're not replacing the entire
drug discovery and development process wholesale
here but we're really honing in on some of the
key aspects, some of the critical bottlenecks
that have hit the field and made those better.
We're not replacing animal testing, as an
example, we're not replacing the clinical
trials themselves but we are getting to faster,
better molecules to run through those things.
CRAIG
Yeah. And your focus right
now is on narrowing to molecules that you can test
or is it on the more general, as you were saying,
the dream is to eventually model all RNA
molecules? Or, are they happening in tandem?
RAPHAEL
It's really in tandem, in some ways. How I think
about it is, you got the long-term bets, then the
midterm kind of things, and the short-term pieces
that we're doing. Especially for science-heavy
company like Atomic, you need that balance because
you want to be looking at that near term of,
[Let's actually show this thing can deliver on the
promise in some cases but then also enable a much
broader space at the same time.] So we continue to
build what I described as RNA foundation models,
collecting these very large data sets to build
accurate models of RNA structure, of RNA function,
etc; enable RNA design, that's an active area of
research here at Atomic. On the other hand, we're
also advancing our first programs into testing in
animals narrowing the search space, as you say,
to find those molecules and testing them. And I
think this is a little bit of my own philosophy
as well, which is, you want to be applying the
technology that you have or putting it to the
test as much as possible. I'm a big believer
in building the thing that is useful, that will
actually move the needle, as opposed to designing
it in isolation and then figuring out how to
apply it. Because I think that by applying it and
looking at where it's useful versus not, then you
can guide further efforts in that direction and
really build the foundation models that are useful
and that are really going to make a difference.
CRAIG
Yeah. But the activity,
you've got this animal trial; if it's successful,
do that move into human trials? I understand the
long-term goal but is the company at this point
focused on generating data that then can train
better models? Or is it– I guess I asked this
already, is it on coming up with therapeutics?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. The boring answer is really both,
frankly, is what I'm getting at in some ways. And
these two things are very linked, in some ways,
actually. I think you're getting at a very
important point, though, because of these first
trials that we're doing, where we're testing in
animals, for example, that's going to generate a
small amount of data. And you can only feed that
back in but oftentimes, the kind of data that's
really critically useful for training these big
AI models looks fairly different than the data you
get out of any given drug discovery program. Maybe
concretely, the way I could paint this for you is
that we have a team that's dedicated to generating
data for the AI models specifically. And we have
another team that's dedicated to pushing
forward the drug discovery programs. There's
a lot of cross-interaction, cross-pollination
between those two but there are specific folks
with very specific mandates at Atomic along
both those lines of what you just described.
CRAIG
Yeah. And remind me when did you form Atomic?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. It's been three years
that we've been going now. We're like 25 people
today, half AI scientists, software engineers,
etc, half biologists, medicinal chemists side
of things. I've been saying this “both” thing
a lot here and it's fundamentally we're trying
to build this interdisciplinary organization
that has that expertise across these different
spans. We're also co-located in the Bay Area to
enable that interplay and interchange of ideas.
So I fundamentally believe that a lot of the
key innovation for a place like Atomic happens
in that white space between established fields
in some ways. It's like, you want to build
that new field there at the intersection.
CRAIG
Yeah,
I was just in DC talking to the director
of the National Science Foundation. How
much are you depending on government grants?
This sounds like something the NSF or other
government organizations would want to fund.
How much you depending on venture capital?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. So at this stage,
we're mostly venture capital-based, however,
you're completely right. There's a major
government angle to this whole thing.
In fact, it's funny that you asked the
question on government; I literally met a
Secretary of State Antony Blinken on Monday,
talking about AI applications for biotech
specifically and making this argument that
some of these large data sets you need to collect
to build these foundation models are like really
key. To build the best foundation models
you need the best data sets that require
sustained investment, long-term investment, the
kind that the US government is uniquely suited
to provide. So you're actually hitting on a very
interesting point there, that I think is very much
an area of excitement for Atomic and
this AI for biotech field in general.
CRAIG
Yeah.
I didn't realize that ARPA,
is that how you pronounce it?
RAPHAEL
Yeah, ARPA
CRAIG
Now there’s ARPA-H
RAPHAEL
Right, ARPA-H
CRAIG
-who’s focused
specifically on healthcare applications. I
also didn't realize until this conference
that there is a national security commission on
biotech now. Are you involved with them at all?
RAPHAEL
I haven't
been involved to this date with some of those
discussions I have been involved with others. I
would say that the way that I would describe
it is, there's this realization across the
government in some ways that biotech is a
major area of innovation that needs focused
investment. And I think that the US wants
to continue being the leader on the global
stage there specifically. So it's thinking
through carefully how to back these kinds
of things and how to potentially increase that
investment in there. So I think there's a lot
of interesting conversations, I mentioned
the one I had on Monday on this front,
as an example. Especially in light of these new
AI applications, you've had these executive orders
get signed from Biden, the White House, really
increasing the focus on these areas overall.
CRAIG
Yeah. Do
you have any trouble with funding or is there
plenty of money for initiatives like yours?
RAPHAEL
I would say AI continues
to be a very strong space for investment as a
whole. I think the biotech market specifically
has been going through a bit of a rough patch
since the pandemic. However, AI for biotech is
the bright spot across that landscape, would
be one way that I think about it. Because,
it's really showing, [Hey, we've seen what
ChatGPT can do, we've seen what AlphaFold
can do.] There's a lot of excitement in some
ways and it's almost like a reverse hype thing,
is one way to think about it. The people that are
closest to it are oftentimes the ones that are
the most excited about the whole thing, which is
kind of cool to see. Especially on the AlphaFold
side of things. ChatGPT, now everyone knows
about that and is excited about that already;
I don't want to say that that hasn’t gotten
into the public consciousness at his point.
CRAIG
Yeah. To that point–
and he's on the commission, I can't remember
his name; he’s the founder of Ginkgo Bioworks.
RAPHAEL
Very nice
CRAIG
Yeah, he was saying that he thinks within
two or three years, and maybe it'll be atomic AI,
there's going to be a ChatGPT moment for biotech.
RAPHAEL
I would very much agree with that.
I think that there's going to be some really
exciting developments in the next few years.
CRAIG
Yeah. Is
there anything I haven't asked that I should ask?
RAPHAEL
I think this was really good. I covered most of
the points that I wanted to hit here; trying to
integrate the wet with the dry lab together
to make that cycle, these RNA breakthroughs,
why we should care about RNA specifically- is
key, Atomic is really trying to bring RNA and AI
together to usher in that new generation. I think
we covered it actually, great set of questions.
CRAIG
I do have one
question. What kind of compute demands do you
have? Is there plenty of compute for what you
need? Again, I had this conversation
with a guy named Brian Spears at the
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, who's
doing work on RNA shape discovery but they've got
the most powerful computers in the world at their
fingertips. How are you handling compute needs?
RAPHAEL
Yeah. I think we always need
more compute, is really the honest answer. We've
bought a bunch of GPUs that we have on-premise,
basically. So we always have access to and
that lets us do a baseline of work basically,
over there. And these are H100, basically,
which are like the top-of-the-line GPUs that
you really need for this kind of work. On top of
that, we burst up the cloud; when we're doing a
big training job, then we'd go to AWS, GCP, or
what have you and train is there. Now, the issue
is always getting quota on these things, getting
enough allocation on the cloud providers to run
these kinds of things. In theory they have a lot
but you can’t always get access to it if there's a
lot of folks training at the same time. So we're
always hunting for more computers, is maybe the
simple way of putting it. I used to work at the
Department of Energy a little bit during my PhD,
using the Summit supercomputer, which is, I don't
know, some ridiculous amount of H100s; and it'd be
very nice to just have that at our fingertips at
some level, like 27,000 H100s or whatever it was.